My name is Aida Horaniet. I am a Doctoral Researcher at the University of Luxembourg and this collection of 400 data visualizations is part of my research. I am interested on data visualization concepts and techniques from epistemologically-distant disciplines and their potential application to interdisciplinary research. 

This collection includes data visualizations that use alternatives to standard statistical graphs (e.g., bar charts, scatter plots, choropleth maps, networks), including variations in their elements (e.g., the axis, grid or marks), the use of rhetorical or embellishment elements, the focus on granularity rather than summary metrics, the application of custom visual vocabularies, the use of multiple layers of information through glyphs, or the use of the visualization as a starting point for interpretation. 

Furthermore, I have tagged the visualizations based on the multiple techniques they employ, according to the following definitions:

- I consider **variations of statistical graphs**, all those data visualizations where the standard graph is still recognizable and knowing the rules that apply to such a graph (level of aggregation, display of axes, gridlines, encoding, etc.), one or more rules are not applied for a specific purpose. Some examples of charts we can identify in the collection include: bar charts, line charts, area charts, pie charts, contour plots, word clouds, radar charts, networks, scatter plots, heatmaps, Gantt charts, bubble charts, bubble maps, treemaps, stream charts, snaky charts and waffle charts, with different degrees of variation.
- The use of **custom encodings** implies leaving aside the standard visual attributes associated with statistical graphs such as lines, rectangles and circles and creating an alternative way of encoding data variables, from replacing some of the elements of a standard statistical graph to completely redesigning all the elements of the visualization, or using direct visualization of the represented objects.
- Contrary to data visualizations with a low data ink ratio, where "extra" elements are avoided, there are also data visualizations where these **embellishing** elements are used with a **rhetorical purpose**, to inform, persuade or motivate a given audience in a particular situation. These elements can be external to the graphics and therefore not linked to the data, in the form of images or drawings. Furthermore, rhetoric and embellishment elements can be part of the graph, not directly to encode the data but for example by using color to create a specific effect, customizing the layout, rotating and superimposing graphs or through specific annotations. Last, rhetoric can also be applied directly in connection to the data, often in combination with the use of custom encodings through rhetorical mapping, where the visual attributes used to encode the data, apply visual metaphors to present the data in terms of the topic, the context, or the implications.
- **Granularity** is defined in this research as the intent to disaggregate summary data typically presented in standard statistical graphs. The “grain” in a dataset is the smallest unit collected. In a data visualization focused on granularity, importance is given to individual and unique cases behind the aggregated numbers. There might be different levels of aggregation/disaggregation, and they might be combined in the same data visualization (drill-up/down approach). 
- A way to display multiple layers of information simultaneously, while maintaining a certain degree of granularity, is the use of multivariate data glyphs, a visual representation of data where the attributes of the graphical entity are defined by the attributes of the data record. To form the data glyphs, the encoding might rely on standard graphs and different levels of variations, customized visual vocabularies, or a combination of both. Every data glyph defines the lowest level of detail and they usually appear as small multiples, where each representation is derived from the same design structure, to leverage visual consistency, economy of perception and uninterrupted visual reasoning. 
- In contrast to representational approaches, in a **non-representational approach**, the existence of data or other representations is not assumed prior to the interpretative work.  Examples include data visualizations that use visual attributes to collect data not based on measurements or observations, such as personal experience or perception. Another example is the use of visual vocabularies for **interpretation**, such as the uncertainty about a time duration or more complex concepts such as point of view, layers, scales or folds. Finally, it includes data visualizations where not only the graph elements can be aesthetically modified, but also the underlying principles, using for example ambiguous categories, multidirectional timelines, or perceived timeliness. Although these elements could be evaluated separately, I have decided to group them together because there are very few visualizations that implement them.

You can explore the collection <a href=“https://aidahi-unilu.github.io/AlternativeDataViz“>here</a>.

You can contribute to extend the collection through <a href="https://forms.gle/TJ5qZ2dr4DUV36AXA">this form</a>. If you have any comments or questions, <a href="mailto:aida.horanietibanez@uni.lu">email me</a>! All the visualizations link directly to the original source, but if you prefer your visualization not to be included in this collection, or if you want to make any modifications, please <a href="mailto:aida.horanietibanez@uni.lu">let me know</a>.

Next steps will include making changes and corrections to the existing collection, adding new visualizations, and automating the submission pipeline. 
